# Cache-Simulator

*CS 211 Fall 2019*

*Assignment 4 - Cache Simulator*

*Instructor : Prof. Santosh Nagarakatte*

#### 1 Overview
The goal of this assignment is to help you understand caches better. You are required to
write a cache simulator using the C programming language. The programs have to run
on iLab machines. We are providing real program memory traces as input to your cache
simulator. The format and structure of the memory traces are described below.


#### 2 Memory Access Traces
The input to the cache simulator is a memory access trace, which we have generated by
executing real programs. The trace contains memory addresses accessed during program
execution. Your cache simulator will have to use these addresses to determine if the access
is a hit or a miss, and the actions to perform in each case. The memory trace file consists of
multiple lines. Each line of the trace file corresponds to a memory accesses performed by the
program. Each line consists of two columns, which are space separated. The second column
reports 48-bit memory address that has been accessed by the program while the first column
indicates whether the memory access is a read (R) or a write (W). The trace file always ends
with a #eof string. We have provided you three input trace files (some of them are larger
in size). You can safely assume the trace files always have proper format.

Here is a sample trace file.
R 0x9cb3d40
W 0x9cb3d40
R 0x9cb3d44
W 0x9cb3d44
R 0xbf8ef498
#eof


#### 3 Cache Simulator
You will implement a cache simulator to evaluate different configurations of caches. Your
program should be able to support traces with any number of lines. The followings are the
requirements for your cache simulator:
• You simulate one level cache.
• The cache size, associativity, the replacement policy, and the block size are the input parameters. Cache size and block size are specified in bytes.
• Replacement algorithm: First In First Out (FIFO).
• You have to simulate a write through cache.


#### 4 Cache Simulator Interface
You have to name your cache simulator C code **first**. Your program should support the following usage interface: ./first <cache size><block size><cache policy><associativity><prefetch size><trace file>
  
where:
A) <cache size>is the total size of the cache in bytes. This number should be a power of 2.
B) <block size>is a power of 2 integer that specifies the size of the cache block in bytes.
C) <cache policy>Here is valid cache policy is fifo and lru if you do the extra credit.
D) <associativity>is one of:
**direct** - simulate a direct mapped cache.
**assoc** - simulate a fully associative cache.
**assoc:n** - simulate an n way associative cache. n will be a power of 2.
E) <prefetch size>is the number of ajacent blocks that should be prefetched by the prefetcher
in case of a miss
F) <trace file>is the name of the input trace file.
NOTE: Your program should check if all the inputs are in valid format, and the trace file
exist. if not print error and then silently terminate the program.


#### 5 Cache Prefetcher
Prefetching is a common technique to increase the spatial locality of the caches beyond
the cache line. The idea of prefetching is to bring the data into the cache before it is
needed (accessed). In a normal cache, you bring a block of data into the cache whenever you
experience a cache-miss. Now, we want you to explore a different type of cache that prefetches
not only brings the block corresponding to the access but also prefetches some adjacent
blocks. The number of adjacent blocks that has to be prefetched every time prefetcher
enabled, is provided by the user as an input.

Here is some important assumptions about the prefetcher. First, the prefetcher is activated
only on cache misses. Second, none of the counters (including the memory read) are updated
if the prefetched block already exist in the cache. Third, with respect to cache replacement
policies, if the prefetched block hits in the cache, the block replacement policy status should
not be updated. Otherwise, it is treated similar to a block that missed the cache.


#### 6 Sample Output
In your program, you should keep track of four counters. These four counters are memory
reads (per cache block), memory writes (per cache block), cache hits, and cache misses. As
the output, your program should print out these four counter in the format shown below.
You should follow the exact same format (pay attention to case sensitivity of the letters),
otherwise, the autograder can not grade your program properly and you do not get any points.

$./first 32 4 fifo assoc:2 1 trace2.txt
no-prefetch
Memory reads: 3499
Memory writes: 2861
Cache hits: 6501
Cache misses: 3499
with-prefetch
Memory reads: 3521
Memory writes: 2861
Cache hits: 8124
Cache misses: 1876

In this example, we are simulating a 2-way set associate cache of size 32 bytes. Each cache
block is 4 bytes. The prefetch size is 1, meaning that we prefetch only one adjacent block.
The trace file name is trace2.txt.
**NOTE**: Some of the trace files are quite large. So it might take a few minutes for the
autograder to grade for all the testcases.


#### 7 Cache Replacement Policy
The goal of the cache replacement policy is to decide which block has to be evicted in case
there is no space in the set for an incoming cache block. It is always preferable to achieve
the best performance to replace the block that will be re-referenced furthest in the future.
There are different ways one can implement cache replacement policy. Here we use FIFO
replacement policy and LRU policy is extra credit.

##### 7.1 FIFO
Using this algorithm, you can always evict the block accessed first in the set without any
regard to how often or how many times it was accessed before. So let us say that your cache
is empty initially and that each set has two ways. Now suppose that you access blocks A,
B, A, C. To make room for C, you would evict A since it was the first block to be brought
into the set.

##### 7.2 LRU
Least Recently Used (LRU) replacement policy is used replace the cache line that is least
recently used. Let us use the same example as the one for FIFO. If we access A,B,A,C. To
make room for C, we should evict B since it is the least recently used block (in contrast to
FIFO which we evicted A)


#### 8 Other Details
1. (a) When your program starts, there is nothing in the cache. So, all cache lines are empty
(invalid).
(b) you can assume that the memory size is 2pow48 . Therefore, memory addresses are 48
bit (zero extend the addresses in the trace file if theyre less than 48-bit in length).
(c) the number of bits in the tag, cache address, and byte address are determined by the
cache size and the block size.

2. For a write-through cache, there is the question of what should happen in case of a
write miss. In this assignment, the assumption is that the block is first read from memory
(one read memory), and then followed by a memory write.

3- You do not need to simulate the memory in this assignment. Because, the traces doesnt
contain any information on data values transferred between the memory and the caches.

4. You have to compile your program with the following flags:
-Wall -Werror -fsanitize=address

5. You should include a makefile in you submission.

#### 9 Extra credit (25 points)
As an extra credit, you should implement LRU (Least Recently Used) cache policy. Your
program should output exactly the same format output as it shown before. Here is an example of running your program with LRU policy.
$./first 32 4 lru assoc:2 1 trace2.txt

#### 10 Submission
You have to e-submit the assignment using Sakai. Put all files (source code + Makefile) into
a directory named first, which itself is a sub-directory under pa4 . Then, create a tar file
(follow the instructions in the previous assignments to create the tar file). Your submission
should be only a tar file named pa4.tar. You have to e-submit the assignment using Sakai.
Your submission should be a tar file named pa4.tar. To create this file, put everything that
you are submitting into a directory named pa4. Then, cd into the directory containing pa4
(that is, pa4s parent directory) and run the following command:
$tar cvf pa4.tar pa4

To check that you have correctly created the tar file, you should copy it (pa4.tar) into
an empty directory and run the following command:
$tar xvf pa4.tar

This is how the folder structure should be.
• pa4
  – first
    ∗ first.c
    ∗ first.h
    ∗ Makefile
    
**Source code**: all source code files necessary for building your programs. e.g. first.c and first.h.
**Makefile**: There should be at least three rules in your Makefile:
  **all**: make a complete build of your program (first).
  **first**: build the executables (first).
  **clean**: prepare for rebuilding from scratch.
